Elements of Design
-------------------

Layout
-------
* Visual Hierachy: The use of tools such as sizes(bigger sizes equals higher importance. use of golden ratio for size measurement. there are exceptions, context matters.) 

* positioning(we read from top to down, left to right. important things in top left of page)

* negative/white space(feel comfortable to use them)

* perspective(illusion of distance) to indicate importance/hierachy between elements

* Marketing Hierachy: attract,  interest, deliver message thru copy, call to action

https://zevendesign.com/designers-guide-to-visual-hierarchy/

* Alignment
The use of different types of grids to order items. The use of modular, column etc grids.

* Proximity: group similar things together and different things far apart. like logo is far apart from navigation buttons. group call to action buttons on the hero section



Typography
-----------
typography is about personality. it can be playful, strict and fancy

serif for print media cos of high resolution
sans serif for screens cos of low resolution but this narrative is changing due to high resolution on screens

serif has 3 distinct styles. oldstyles, modern and slabs
oldstyle for classic personality and refined taste as used in restaurants, law firms, music etc
modern style good gor headlines and big texts in fashion, luxury, refined, serious, modern
slab for strong and mechaninal reserved for headings and big texts

sans serif are rather versatile and for general use, best for paragraph texts

display for headings and not used too much. looks like chalk on board

script for handwriting. playful handwritten  for children. not good for paragraph text

Use the right font for the appopriate atmosphere and emotion

Max of TWO fonts in a website and should be DIFFERENT in appearance and must make sense. one for headlines to show personality and one for body text for good readability. and get the font pairing right

in a particular domain, draw inspiration from other design works to see the popular fonts used in that domain




Color
------
You get colors from pictures of natural world around us, inspiration from other peoples work, brand color, logo, style guide, brand guideline, previous website
you sample from them and fine tune them
you can sample them using color eye dropper tool and generate palettes from sites like coolors.co

to pick colors from images, blur the image enough to see only colors then sample them. sometimes the colors picked, become dull so you need to fine tune them to get the right color compared to the unblured image

to fine tune the color, adjust only the saturation and brightness based on the HSB color system
Hue - the main color or the color itself
Saturation - how much of the color itself
Brightness - how light(white) or dark(black) the color is
tint - how much white in the color
shade - how much black in the color
tone - how much gray in the color

if you change the hue, youre changing the color
if you remove the hue, the image is desaturated

you can use colors to create contrast by using bright and dull colors together. this is based on light on darkness or darkness on white

based on one color, several other colors can be made or generated using color harmonies. use color.adobe.com to generate colors and palettes

tips to improve color design
dont use too many colors just like in cooking, dont use all the spices. just a few will do

too much saturation. just like music, you dont want to raise the volume of all instruments to 100%

low contrast in color pairings. to check low contrast, remove the hue(desaturate) and adjust the saturation to create more contrast

in applying colors, you can use the 60-30-10 rule for primary, secondary and accent colors. the primary for the background and its contrast for body copy. the accent for links of call to actions or very special things. the secondary for secondary stuff when no color can be used/found

My simple trick on how to pic colors from pics, the dominant color becomes the background color, the second dominant becomes the paragraph and least becomes the heading/links etc. but this is not a hard rule to follow.




Images
-------
ways to make texts readable on images is to use overlays by adding a transparent color fill ontop of the image.

also, you can tint the image if you want to use brand colors in the design, this is done by desaturating the image and adding a transparent color ontop of the image.

overlays does not have to be the whole image, it can be some part of the image where there are texts like the navigation area

you dont always have to use full images. in some instances, it is apppopriate to zoom in on the subject to focus on the emotion of the image like in movie  posters. this technique is called extreme crop. it tells the story with mystery in the image without using the full picture. make viewer solve the puzzle. this is good for human face, an object etc
then there is another one called peeking thru the blinds thats good for landscapes and wide horizontal narrow vertical view

another technique is soft cropping, where the edge is blurred/faded into the text area. it could be blurred, stretched etc. for the fade color, use a color from the image background

sometimes, you can use strict edges between your text and images instead of fading. itll need to link to the text somehow. you can cut out some part of the image into the text are to create some sort of link like in the tile roof top hero example in the course

rule of thirds: in a horizontal picture with a vertical main subject, place the subject at the intersection of the lines either at the left or right vertical lines. there should be a lot of space beside the subject.
with a horizntal horizon, place it on either the top or bottom horizontal lines. there are always exceptions, context matters.

gett images from pixabay, pexels, unsplash



Design Tricks
--------------

Contrast: it can be used in colors(bright/dark), sizes(big/small), and weight(heavy/light)

white/negative space: is technically a contrast. something over nothing. something in a pool of white space draws attention. white space can be any color not only white. Good design is as little design as possible. dont be afraid of white space, its good design. 

repetition: it creates patterns which we as humans like. when one item may not be interesting on its own, try repetition like formation dance. reason why few colors are used in designs is because of repetition. it helps create pattern with colors, photography style, layout(zigzag) etc for benefits of products/services. patterns exist in natural world so it makes sense. when you use a non-traditional shape, it needs to be repeated to create consistency

overlapping: makes the element pop out. usually images overlapping texts and vice versa. it creates tension. one popular way to overlap is to draw shapes behind images, other shapes
a design decision needs to be intentional so that it is okay to bend or break the rules. eg if the overlap trick breaks the grid. this is because the background shape now becomes part of the main background which does not live on the grid. it is the text and images that do.

tension: it is the reason why overlapping, rule of thirds work because they tend to disagree with boring alignment. tension makes a design interesting, it gives it a little charge. it can be the flair which makes design break rules to make intentional decisions. like shapes not aligning to other or similar shapes just to prevent a boring design. angled shapes are very good for tension since they already not in conformity with the traditional rectangle screen. parallelogram, trapezoids, triangles to denote movement of speed since speed tends to cause tension.

consistency: similar elements must have the same style, feel and look. consistency in alignment, colors, type, photos, icons, shape and form(curve shapes between sections). to ensure consistency in stock photos, pick them from the same contributor from the platform. for icons, pick them from the same pack. refer course notes on consistency





Practice Design
----------------

Mimic method: at the beginning of learning any new skill, the best way to accelerate your growth is by copying the work of masters/experts. this is because the work of a master have good design principles built in them. so by copying/mimicking them, you practise good design habits. 
three stages in mimicking = copying -> remixing -> creating
thats why some works of great artist are influenced by other artists. people practise flat design today because someone invented it sometime ago. flat design was also influenced by simplicity. so you see, everthing you see is influenced by some other thing. we steal ideas from each other and its ok. trends in design. how many car manufacturers are there?😂😂😂
it doesnt mean originality is bad but too much originality may make users not understand you. users like fresh ideas because they resemble others(recognise pattern) but in a new perspective👌.

Inspiration: when you search for inspiration, search for modern designs. to make it simple, search from curated sites not from Google or some random blog. search from sites curated by designers or where designers meet. works agreed on by experts to be nice are indeed nice. examples of sites to get inspiration:
https://webflow.com/blog/web-design-inspiration
www.dribbble.com | www.lapa.ninja | land-book.com | behance.net|  | pinterest.com(on this site, once you find a good design, click on the more ideas icon to open a page of similar designs. you can save designs on this site and come back later for it esp when youre casually browsing the web)

Mood board: create a mood board by first, using tags to search for inspiration from various sites. save the images of the ones you like, open figma, create a frame and put all the images in the frame, arrange them well. expand the fram to fit all the images, its good to use a black background color since most sites are white.